                                          R&D-AGENT: A N LLM-AGENT F RAMEWORK T O -
                                          WARDS AUTONOMOUS DATA S CIENCE

                                               Xu Yang*,‡ , Xiao Yang*,‡ , Shikai Fang‡ , Yifei Zhang‡ , Jian Wang‡ , Bowen Xian‡ ,
                                               Qizheng Li‡ , Jingyuan Li‡ , Minrui Xu‡ , Yuante Li‡ , Haoran Pan‡ ,
                                               Yuge Zhang‡ , Weiqing Liu†,‡ , Yelong Shen§ , Weizhu Chen§ , Jiang Bian‡
                                               ‡
                                                 Microsoft Research Asia, § Microsoft GenAI
                                               {xuyang1,xiaoyang,fangshikai,v-zhangyifei,v-jianwan,
                                               v-bxian,v-qizhengli,v-lijingyuan,v-xuminrui,
                                               v-yuanteli,v-haoranpan,Yuge.Zhang,Weiqing.Liu,
                                               Yelong.Shen,wzchen,Jiang.Bian}@microsoft.com
                                               *
                                                 Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.
arXiv:2505.14738v2 [cs.AI] 1 Oct 2025




                                                        40%   Task Complexity
                                                                   Low==Lite                                                                  35.1±0.4
                                                        35%        Medium
                                                                   High                                                          29.3±0.8
                                                        30%        All ± SEM
                                        Any Medal (%)




                                                        25%

                                                        20%                                           16.9±1.1      16.9±1.2

                                                        15%
                                                                                            8.6±0.5
                                                        10%                      5.1±1.3
                                                        5%      1.3±0.5
                                                        0%
                                                                 MLAB           OpenHands    AIDE        AIDE      ML-Master    ML-Master    R&D-Agent
                                                                 GPT-4o           GPT-4o    GPT-4o    o1-preview    GPT-5*     Deepseek-R1     GPT-5

                                          Figure 1: Agent performance on MLE-Bench. Stacked bars show any medal rates for Low==Lite (22
                                          tasks), Medium (38 tasks), and High (15 tasks) complexity levels. The dashed line indicates overall
                                          performance (mean ± SEM). R&D-Agent achieves SOTA performance at 35.1 ± 0.4%. * indicates
                                          our re-evaluation of ML-Master within our environment.

                                                                                                  A BSTRACT

                                                              Recent advances in AI and ML have transformed data science, yet increasing
                                                              complexity and expertise requirements continue to hinder progress. Although
                                                              crowd-sourcing platforms alleviate some challenges, high-level machine learning
                                                              engineering (MLE) tasks remain labor-intensive and iterative. We introduce R&D-
                                                              Agent, a comprehensive, decoupled, and extensible framework that formalizes
                                                              the MLE process. R&D-Agent defines the MLE workflow into two phases and
                                                              six components, turning agent design for MLE from ad-hoc craftsmanship into
                                                              a principled, testable process. Although several existing agents report promising
                                                              gains on their chosen components, they can mostly be summarized as a partial
                                                              optimization from our framework’s simple baseline. Inspired by human experts,
                                                              we designed efficient and effective agents within this framework that achieve state-
                                                              of-the-art performance. Evaluated on MLE-Bench, the agent built on R&D-Agent
                                                              ranks as the top-performing machine learning engineering agent, achieving 35.1%
                                                              any medal rate, demonstrating the ability of the framework to speed up innovation
                                                              and improve accuracy across a wide range of data science applications.


                                                                                                       1
1        INTRODUCTION
Over the past decade, artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) have fundamentally
reshaped data science, driving advances across domains as diverse as machine translation (Isik et al.,
2025), recommendation systems (Yuan et al., 2025), social simulation (Yang et al., 2025), and medical
diagnostics (Sepehri et al., 2025). The growing availability of large-scale datasets (Ghorbani et al.,
2023), coupled with rapid algorithmic progress, has enabled models that deliver increasingly accurate
and adaptive outcomes. However, as data becomes more heterogeneous and high-dimensional, so
does the demand for experienced data scientists who can craft appropriate models, interpret nuanced
patterns, and iterate toward optimal solutions.
Crowdsourcing platforms like Kaggle1 partially mitigate the expertise bottleneck by mobilizing
thousands of data scientists, yet they also expose the limits of human-driven workflows: even top teams
spend considerable time on trial-and-error experimentation, feature crafting, and hyperparameter
tuning, making progress labor-intensive and slow.
Large language models (LLMs) offer an opportunity to mitigate these limitations. Their demonstrated
strengths in code generation and reasoning(Achiam et al., 2023; Team et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024)
suggest they can automate exploration of large design spaces. Machine Learning Engineering
(MLE) serves as an ideal testbed for this potential, as success critically depends on efficiently
navigating vast configuration spaces to identify optimal solutions. However, a significant gap persists
between promise and practice. Benchmarks like MLE-bench (Chan et al., 2024), built on real
Kaggle competitions, report that state-of-the-art LLMs reach only a small fraction of human expert
performance, whereas well-designed agents can perform much better, highlighting the potential of
improved agent design to accelerate MLE exploration.
Inspired by the common workflow of data scientist, we introduce R&D-Agent, a comprehensive,
decoupled, and extensible framework that formalizes the MLE process. Mirroring how data scientists
work in practice, R&D-Agent separates: (i) a Research phase focused on idea generation and search-
covering planning (e.g., dynamically adjusting guidelines over time), exploration path structures
(e.g., tree-based search vs. chain-based search), memory context (organizing and retrieving prior
solutions and knowledge), and reasoning pipelines (for hypothesis formation and refinement); and (ii)
a Development phase focused on implementation and feedback-covering coding workflows (steps
turning ideas into runnable code efficiently) and evaluation strategy (obtaining reliable and robust
data-driven feedback). For each aspect, a simple and LLM-first baseline strategy is established as a
clear starting point.
Positioning existing systems within this decomposition clarifies their coverage and gaps. As shown
in Table 1, previous work typically optimizes only a narrow slice of the workflow. For instance,
AIDE (Jiang et al., 2025) and ML-Master (Liu et al., 2025) primarily target the exploration path
structure via tree-based search, while MLE-STAR (Nam et al., 2025) explores deeply along a single
chain. KompeteAI (Kulibaba et al., 2025) emphasizes the coding workflow with faster debugging.
All the existing methods can be summarized as a partial optimization from our framework’s
simple baseline.

Table 1: Comparison of R&D-Agent with existing methods, grouped by Research and Development
phase design aspects. “/” denotes not covered or a simple, LLM-first baseline strategy. Research
phase includes: (i) Planning, (ii) Exploration Path Structuring, (iii) Memory Context, (iv) Reasoning
Pipeline. Development phase includes: (v) Coding Workflow, (vi) Evaluation Strategy. Ó indicates
that the framework provides multiple options followed by recommended best practices. Details of
R&D-Agent’s design are provided in Sec. 3.3.

                                                                          Agent Designs                                                          Frameworks
     Phase     Design Aspect
                                           AIDE               ML-Master               KompeteAI              MLE-STAR                 AIRA                   R&D-Agent
                                     (Jiang et al., 2025)   (Liu et al., 2025)   (Kulibaba et al., 2025)   (Nam et al., 2025)   (Toledo et al., 2025)          (Ours)
               Planning                      /                     /                       /                      /                     /                   Ó Dynamic
               Path Structuring        Tree (Greedy)         Tree + MCTS            Tree + Merging              Chain            Ó Tree + MCTS              Ó Adaptive
    Research
               Memory Context                /                  Sibling                 Sibling                Sibling             Ó Sibling             Ó Collab. Comm.
               Reasoning Pipeline        One step              One step                One step                One step             One step            Ó Scientific multi-step
               Coding Workflow          Node Debug            Node Debug                  Debug                 Debug                     /             Ó Eff. & Iter. Debug
Development
               Evaluation Strategy           /                     /                        /                     /                       /               Ó Aggregated


     1
         https://www.kaggle.com/


                                                                                      2
Although these systems report promising gains on their chosen components, they often (i) cover only
a subset of the full MLE workflow, (ii) entangle multiple steps into monolithic pipelines rather than
cleanly separating them into specialized components or agents, and (iii) leave many alternative designs
within each phase unexplored. As a result, insights and improvements are difficult to generalize
or reuse across tasks and domains. While Toledo et al. (2025) recognize the need for a flexible
framework, their design offers limited agent-level modularity and restricts exploration of the broader
design space.
Our framework directly addresses these issues. R&D-Agent (i) is comprehensive, enabling systematic
exploration across the entire MLE workflow; (ii) is well-decoupled, allowing each phase to be
implemented, replaced, and improved by dedicated components or expert agents; and (iii) is highly
extensible, supporting plug-and-play alternatives that unify and generalize prior systems while
facilitating the discovery of new agent configurations. In short, R&D-Agent turns agent design for
MLE from ad-hoc craftsmanship into a principled, testable process.
Guided by human expertise, we instantiate R&D-Agent and conduct systematic ablations across each
phases to isolate the contribution of each component. Composing the best-performing choices shown
in Table 1 within the framework yields a well-configured agent that delivers significant gains on
MLE-bench (Chan et al., 2024), achieving new state-of-the-art results.
In summary, our primary contributions are:
    • We introduce R&D-Agent, a comprehensive, decoupled, and extensible autonomous agent
      framework that formalizes the MLE process by separating a research phase (planning, exploration
      path structure, memory context, and reasoning pipelines) from a development phase (coding
      workflows and evaluation strategy).
    • With R&D-Agent enabling plug-and-play alternatives, we conduct systematic ablations across
      both phases to isolate the contribution of each component and derive insights into the factors that
      most affect agent performance on data science.
    • Guided by human expertise, an R&D-Agent configuration that composes the best-performing
      choices within the framework delivers significant gains on MLE-bench (Chan et al., 2024),
      achieving new state-of-the-art results and demonstrating the efficiency and effectiveness of our
      approach.

2     P REREQUISITES
In the context of MLE agents, the main goal is to maximize the evaluation score on a given benchmark
under a limited time budget. Formally, let T be an ML task with dataset D = {Ddev , Dtest }, where
Ddev is the development set and Dtest is the test set. The agent can only develop, tune, and iterate
its solution on Ddev , while the final performance is measured on the unseen Dtest . This fundamental
separation means the agent never has access to the final evaluation metric during its development
process. Instead, it must rely on a proxy metric, M (s; Ddev ), evaluated on the development set to guide
its exploration. Let T denote the total allowed wall-clock time for the agent to generate a complete
solution (including the actual execution/running time of the solution code). Let s = Agent(T , T ) be a
candidate solution generated by the agent (e.g., a Python script for data preprocessing, model training,
and evaluation) within this generation-time budget T . The performance of s on T is measured by a
task-specific metric M (s; Dtest ) ∈ R, such as accuracy or correlation.
The agent’s objective can be written as the constrained optimization problem
                     s⋆ = arg       max           M (s; Dtest ),   s.t.   gen_time(s) ≤ T,
                                s=Agent(T ,T ),
                                    s∈S

where S is the set of all feasible solutions the agent can generate and gen_time(s) denotes the total
generation time spent by the agent to produce s⋆ .

3     R&D-AGENT
The architecture of the R&D-Agent framework, illustrated in Figure 2, addresses the core challenge of
efficiently exploring optimal solutions in MLE. Built on a modular design principle, it decomposes the
entire pipeline into distinct, configurable components. The framework orchestrates two specialized


                                                          3
                              More Exploration
                                                                                            ❶Planning:                                More Exploitation                                  Remaining time

                              Try to tackle different problems efficiently           dynamic strategy over time                      Optimize existing solutions
                              Solution with low computational budget                                                                 Solution with high computational budget
                              ...                                                                                                    ...
                                    ❷Exploration Path Structuring
                                                                                                                                                                                         An Idea
                                                                                                                                    Parallel Exploration                                 (failed to improve)

                                                                                                                 SelectParents                                                           An Idea
                                                                                                                                                                                         (improved)
                                                                                                          ...
                                                                                                                                                                                         Early Stop

                                 Initialization                                                           ...
                                                                                                                                                                         Parallel Running Processes
                                                                                                          ...                                  Next Expansion
                                                                                                                                                                                  P#1             P#3
                                                                                                                                                    Node
                                                                                                                                                                                  P#2             P#4

                                                  ❸Reasoning Pipeline & Idea Proposal
                                                                                                 Virtual Eval.              ❺Coding Workflow               ❻Evaluation Strategy
 Within EachEexpansion Step




                                                      ❹Memory                                                                      Dev & Enhance                   Run & Calc.
                                                                                                                                                                 Evaluation Metric
                                                                                                                             Iteratively Efficient Debug
                                                         Context
                                                                                                                                       Sampled Dataset
                                                                                                                                                                    Data Curation
                                                                                                                                        for Debugging
                                  Prev. Real                                                                                                                                                      Real
                                                   Problem/Challenge         Hypothesis Driven
                                  Eval. from                                                                                                                                    Full          Eval. from
                                                      Identification          Idea Proposal                                      Runnable Solution
                                  Valid. Data                                                                                                                                  Dataset        Valid. Data

                                                   Scientifically Inspired Reasoning Pipeline




                                                                        Research Agent                                                      Development Agent


Figure 2: Framework of R&D-Agent. R&D-Agent works in an iterative loop in which the Research
Agent proposes ideas and the Development Agent implements them into runnable solutions to obtain
feedback from data. By decoupling high-level research from low-level implementation, the framework
efficiently explores the solution space through parallel exploration paths and iterative refinement,
progressively converging on optimal solutions.


agents: a Research Agent that explores ideas through parallel paths, and a Development Agent that
implements and iteratively refines these proposals.

This modularity transforms agent development from monolithic construction into compositional
optimization, enabling systematic exploration of a vast configuration space. Guided by human
expert workflows, we navigated this space to identify an optimal design that achieves state-of-the-
art performance on MLE-Bench, validating both our modular approach and the effectiveness of
human-inspired reasoning patterns.

3.1                               F RAMEWORK OVERVIEW
Inspired by the common workflow of data scientists, the R&D-Agent framework defines six key,
extensible components, organized into two main phases: the Research Phase and the Development
Phase. We introduce the Framework Concept (FC) of each component in this section.

The Research Phase. The research phase aims to discover and refine promising ideas before
committing to costly implementation. It consists of four primary components:

 ❶ FC-Planning: This component focuses on the high-level allocation of exploration effort over
   time. Since data science tasks are sequential decision problems involving iterative trial-and-error,
   an effective plan must dynamically adjust the timing, budget, and guidelines for idea exploration.
   It adapts priorities and resources as new information emerges, managing the crucial trade-off
   between exploration and exploitation.

 ❷ FC-Exploration Path Structuring: This component determines how the solutions are organized
   and the historical solutions to which they will be referred. Strategies range from greedy chain-
   based approaches (Nam et al., 2025), which offer fast convergence at the risk of local optima,
   to tree-based search methods (Liu et al., 2025; Kulibaba et al., 2025), which maintain greater
   diversity at a higher computational cost. Our framework supports hybrid and adaptive designs
   that can combine these strengths.


                                                                                                                    4
 ❸ FC-Reasoning Pipeline: This component defines how knowledge from the memory context is
   transformed into concrete research ideas. This process may include dataset analysis, hypothesis
   formulation, benefit justification, trade-off assessment, and implementable solution sketches. A
   clear, structured reasoning pipeline improves the quality, novelty, and feasibility of ideas, while
   supporting systematic evaluation before moving to development.
 ❹ FC-Memory Context: This component manages how accumulated knowledge, such as historical
   solutions, evaluation results, and insights, is stored, retrieved, and reused to inform the reasoning
   pipeline. Well-structured memory enables knowledge transfer between iterations, reduces
   redundant exploration, and stabilizes long-horizon reasoning.
The Development Phase. The development phase turns the most promising research ideas into
fully bug-free and evaluated solutions. It is composed of two key components:
 ❺ FC-Coding Workflow: This component covers the process from a conceptual idea to bug-
   free code. It emphasizes modular design, efficient iterative debugging, and early detection of
   runtime issues. Techniques like rapid prototyping on sampled data can significantly shorten the
   development cycle while preserving correctness.
 ❻ FC-Evaluation Strategy: This component ensures reliable and consistent assessment of solution
   performance. A strong evaluation strategy involves choosing stable metrics, adhering to fixed
   validation settings, and using aggregated evaluations to reduce noise. This mitigates overfitting
   risks, filters out spurious high scores from underfitting, and ensures that iterative improvements
   reflect genuine performance gains rather than evaluation artifacts.

3.2     F RAMEWORK F ORMULATION
We formalize the R&D-Agent framework with the high-level algorithm presented in Algorithm 1.
The algorithm iteratively builds an exploration graph G, by executing a loop composed of a Research
Phase and a Development Phase until the time budget T is met. Each component in the algorithm
corresponds to the design aspects detailed in our framework overview. We call the loop in Algorithm 1
containing a research and development phase as R&D loop.

Algorithm 1: High-Level Algorithm of the R&D-Agent Framework
Notation :Gt : exploration graph; πt : plan; Nt : parent nodes; ct : context; it : idea; xt : code; st :
          score.
Input :ML task T , total time budget T
Output :Final solution x∗
G←∅                                                  // Initialize exploration graph
while elapsed_time() < T do
      // Research Phase
      π ← P(G, elapsed_time(), T )                                       // Planning
      N ← SelectParents(G, π)                        // Exploration Path Structuring
      c ← M(G, π)                                                  // Memory Context
      i ← R(c, N , π)                                          // Reasoning Pipeline
      // Development Phase
      x ← Dev(i, N )                                                    // Coding Workflow
      s ← Eval(x, T )                                               // Evaluation Strategy
   G ← G ∪ {(N , i, x, s)}                                  // Update exploration graph
end
x∗ ← Submit(G)                                 // Select and submit final solution

3.3     A H UMAN -E XPERT-I NSPIRED AGENT D ESIGN
The R&D-Agent framework enables the systematic discovery of novel agent architectures. Guided
by the workflows of human experts, we identified a specific, highly efficient agent configuration that
establishes a new state-of-the-art on MLE-Bench. This section details the design choices for each
of the six components in this SOTA configuration, with its core ideas illustrated in Figure 2. We
introduce the Module Design (MD) of each component in this section.


                                                     5
❶ MD-Planning. Like human experts in scientific exploration, we quickly identify promising
  directions in the early stages and move to more sophisticated solutions later. To achieve this, we
  use a dynamic planning strategy that adjusts over time. In the early stage (e.g., the first hour), the
  agent is given a limited computational budget, which discourages the use of heavy techniques
  such as ensembles or cross-validation. As promising directions emerge, the budget gradually
  increases, enabling more costly yet effective methods (e.g., ensembles, cross-validation) in later
  stages (e.g., at 4h). The plan also steers idea generation: early stages encourage novelty, while
  later stages focus on refining high-performing solutions with proven techniques.

❷ MD-Exploration Path Structuring. Like human experts, R&D-Agent explores multiple re-
  search directions in parallel and merges their strengths at the last stage for optimal solutions. We
  adopt an adaptive DAG-based exploration structure guided by a core insight: initial implementa-
  tions have disproportionate impact on exploration diversity, as subsequent steps are inherently
  path-dependent. Therefore, we maximize diversity in the first layer to establish distinct research
  directions, then greedily exploit the best solution within each branch while pruning sub-optimal
  paths. This design achieves efficient parallel exploration and result fusion.

❸ MD-Scientific Reasoning Pipeline. Human data scientists typically follow a rigorous reasoning
  process to propose research ideas, which is a valuable distillation of human intelligence. Inspired
  by this, we propose a scientific multi-step reasoning pipeline that begins by analyzing the current
  solution and dataset characteristics to identify the most critical problem (e.g., for a time-series
  dataset, mining temporal patterns is crucial for high performance). Rather than generating shallow
  ideas, the agent dives deeper into the problem, formulating hypotheses on why a proposed method
  would address it (e.g., an RNN can capture temporal dependencies in time-series data), and
  finally outputs an idea implementable by an LLM (e.g., training an LSTMGraves (2012) to
  model dependencies). Since verifying ideas is more costly than generating them, we introduce a
  virtual evaluation strategy: the agent generates multiple ideas during reasoning, uses LLM-based
  assessments to select the most promising one, and sends only that to the development phase.

❹ MD-Memory Context. We enhance collaborative memory to enable knowledge sharing across
  parallel branches without sacrificing diversity. Each branch begins with a distinct idea and
  explores independently. After hypothesis generation, we augment each branch’s context with
  two sources: the best ideas across all branches and a probabilistically sampled subset from others.
  The sampling kernel favors ideas that are topically similar and have higher scores, with more
  recent ideas weighted higher. An LLM then selects the most promising candidates from this
  enriched pool, accelerating convergence while maintaining exploration diversity.

❺ MD-Coding Workflow. To improve efficiency, particularly for solutions with long runtimes, we
  adopt an efficient and iterative debug workflow. Our LLM-powered agent first samples a small,
  representative subset of the training data and enters a rapid prototyping loop: implementing the
  proposed idea, testing on this subset, and refining based on immediate feedback. This cycle
  continues until achieving a runnable and logically sound solution on the subset. Only validated
  solutions proceed to full-scale evaluation. This approach mirrors human rapid prototyping
  practices, significantly reducing development time by catching errors early and ensuring that
  computational resources are not wasted on flawed implementations. The workflow enables the
  agent to explore substantially more solution candidates within the same time budget.

❻ MD-Evaluation Strategy. To ensure robust and reliable performance assessment, we implement
  an aggregated evaluation strategy with standardized protocols. A key challenge in many MLE
  tasks is that evaluation logic is part of the agent’s solution, causing inconsistent metrics and
  data splits that prevent fair comparison. We address this through two mechanisms. First, we
  enforce standardized data splitting: preparing fixed train-validation-test splits at the beginning
  of agent runs, with test data remaining entirely inaccessible for final grading. Second, beyond
  standard validation-based selection, we introduce an additional evaluation layer that collects
  top solutions from different exploration branches and evaluates them using consistent metrics
  on the same validation set. This aggregated approach ensures fair comparison across diverse
  solution strategies and enables more reliable selection of the best-performing solution for final
  submission.


                                                  6
4    EXPERIMENT
To rigorously evaluate R&D-Agent’s capabilities in realistic data science scenarios, we conduct
extensive experiments on MLE-Bench (Chan et al., 2024). As a benchmark comprising a diverse
set of authentic Kaggle competitions, MLE-Bench serves as an excellent proxy for real-world
challenges, demanding a holistic combination of strategic thinking and robust engineering for agents
to autonomously design, build, and train models.
4.1 E XPERIMENT S ETUP
All our experiments are conducted on the MLE-Bench (Chan et al., 2024) benchmark. We compare
R&D-Agent against leading open-source systems, primarily ML-Master (Liu et al., 2025) and
AIDE (Jiang et al., 2025), using their official leaderboard metrics. In time budget, we align with ML-
Master allowing 12 hours compared to the official 24 hours setting. In computation, our environment
has a lower throughput with 12 vCPUs, 220GB RAM, and 1 V100 GPU while AIDE uses 36 vCPU,
440GB RAM and 1 A10 GPU, ML-Master uses 36 vCPU, 512GB shared RAM and 1 A100 GPU.
Therefore, our experimental setup is intentionally more challenging than all the previous work.
To ensure fair comparison, we evaluate R&D-Agent using two frontier LLM configurations: (1)
GPT-5 only, and (2) a hybrid o3(R) + GPT-4.1(D), where o3 powers the Research phase and GPT-4.1
the Development phase. Furthermore, We re-evaluated the previous SOTA, ML-Master, under our
identical 12-hour setting using both configurations. All our new results are averaged over three
runs with different random seeds for statistical robustness. Our evaluation is based on the official
MLE-Bench metrics, with the Any-Medal Rate as the primary indicator of overall performance.
4.2 M AIN R ESULTS
R&D-Agent establishes a new SOTA on MLE-Bench (Chan et al., 2024), significantly outperforming
all existing open-source systems. As illustrated in Figure 1, R&D-Agent powered by GPT-5 achieves
35.1% Any-Medal Rate, exceeding the previous state-of-the-art ML-Master (Liu et al., 2025) (29.3%
with Deepseek-R1) by 5.8 percentage points. The stacked bars further reveal R&D-Agent’s consistent
superiority across all task complexity levels, demonstrating its robust performance on diverse data
science challenges.
Table 2 further demonstrates our framework’s architectural advantages. With GPT-5, R&D-Agent
achieves the highest Any-Medal Rate at 35.1 ± 0.4%, while our hybrid o3(R) + GPT-4.1(D) configu-
ration also excels at 29.7 ± 0.4%, with both substantially outperforming all prior systems. Crucially,
when ML-Master was re-evaluated with GPT-5 in our environment, it achieved only 16.9 ± 2.0%2 .
This direct comparison under identical LLM configurations confirms that our framework’s design,
not merely model selection, drives the substantial performance gap. Both R&D-Agent configurations
demonstrate strong performance across multiple metrics, with GPT-5 achieving 45.3 ± 0.0% Above-
Median Rate and 16.4 ± 0.9% Gold Medal Rate, showcasing the framework’s ability to consistently
produce competitive solutions regardless of the underlying LLM choice.
4.3 A BLATION S TUDY
We quantify each component’s contribution by removing one component at a time while preserving all
others. For computational efficiency, evaluations are conducted on a curated subset of 40 competitions
from MLE-Bench (Chan et al., 2024) using GPT-5 (see Appendix D.4). This subset includes tasks
where our method, AIDE (Jiang et al., 2025), or ML-Master (Liu et al., 2025) achieved medals,
ensuring coverage of scenarios most influenced by our design.
Our analysis aligns with the dual-phase architecture: the research phase ablation evaluates four com-
ponents (dynamic planning, exploration path structuring, memory context, and reasoning pipeline),
while the development phase ablation focuses on implementation elements (coding workflows and
evaluation strategy).
4.3.1 R ESEARCH P HASE A BLATION S TUDY
Table 3 summarizes our analysis across four key metrics: (1) Avg. Loops: number of R&D loops
per competition, (2) Improve Rate: percentage of R&D loops yielding performance gains, (3)
   2
     This differs from ML-Master’s official 29.3% primarily due to: (1) hardware differences (V100 vs. A100
GPU), and (2) backend model differences (GPT-5 vs. Deepseek-R1). We report this for transparent comparison
under identical conditions.


                                                    7
Table 2: Comparative performance of all agents across the official MLE-Bench evaluation metrics.
All results represent the mean ± SEM from three independent runs with different random seeds.
The top-performing agent is highlighted in bold and the second-best is underlined. * indicates our
re-evaluation of ML-Master (Liu et al., 2025) within our environment (V100 GPU) to ensure fair
comparison under identical conditions. Complete individual run results are provided in Appendix D.1.

                          Valid       Above                                                  Any
                                                      Bronze        Silver       Gold
 Agent                  Submission    Median                                                 Medal
                                                       (%)           (%)         (%)
                           (%)         (%)                                                    (%)
 MLAB (Huang et al., 2023)
 GPT-4o                 44.3 ± 2.6   1.9 ± 0.7        0.0 ± 0.0   0.0 ± 0.0    0.8 ± 0.5    0.8 ± 0.5
 OpenHands (Wang et al., 2024)
 GPT-4o                 52.0 ± 3.3   7.1 ± 1.7        0.4 ± 0.4   1.3 ± 0.8    2.7 ± 1.1    4.4 ± 1.4
 AIDE (Jiang et al., 2025)
 GPT-4o                 54.9 ± 1.0   14.4 ± 0.7       1.6 ± 0.2   2.2 ± 0.3    5.0 ± 0.4    8.7 ± 0.5
 o1-preview             82.8 ± 1.1   29.4 ± 1.3       3.4 ± 0.5   4.1 ± 0.6    9.4 ± 0.8    16.9 ± 1.1
 ML-Master (Liu et al., 2025)
 Deepseek-R1            93.3 ± 1.3   44.9 ± 1.2       4.4 ± 0.9   7.6 ± 0.4    17.3 ± 0.8   29.3 ± 0.8
 o3(R) + GPT-4.1(D)*    98.2 ± 0.9   25.8 ± 1.9       5.8 ± 1.6   3.1 ± 1.9     9.3 ± 0.8   18.2 ± 1.9
 GPT-5*                 85.3 ± 3.5   26.2 ± 1.6       4.4 ± 1.2   3.1 ± 0.4     9.3 ± 0.8   16.9 ± 1.2
 R&D-Agent (Ours)
 o3(R) + GPT-4.1(D)     94.2 ± 0.4   44.9 ± 0.4   6.2 ± 0.9        7.5 ± 1.2   16.0 ± 0.8   29.7 ± 0.4
 GPT-5                  96.0 ± 0.0   45.3 ± 0.0   6.7 ± 1.5       12.0 ± 0.8   16.4 ± 0.9   35.1 ± 0.4



First-Medal: time to first medal-winning solution, (4) Medal Rate: percentage achieving medals in
the 40-competition subset. (5) Any Medal: percentage achieving medals in the whole 75-competition
set. The 35 remaining competitions are all considered non-medal in this calculation.

Table 3: Research Phase Ablation Results on 40-competition subset. Each column removes one
component while preserving others. Full System shows mean ± SEM over 3 runs; ablation results
report single representative runs due to computational constraints.

Metric           Full System w/o Planning w/o Exploration w/o Reasoning w/o Memory
                                               Path          Pipeline     Context
Avg. Loops        45.9 ± 2.2     48.4          19.4            55.3         44.0
Improve Rate (%) 41.1 ± 0.4      39.4          40.0            23.0         40.9
First-Medal (h)    2.9 ± 0.1      1.7           3.0             1.7          2.0
Medal Rate (%)    65.8 ± 0.8     50.0          47.5            50.0         60.0
Any Medal (%)     35.1 ± 0.4     26.7          25.3            26.7          32

Each ablation reveals how R&D-Agent degrades toward existing baselines (Table 1), confirming our
framework’s architectural advantages:
  • w/o Planning (24% relative decline). Degrading component Planning from Dynamic to baseline
    approaches lacking strategic resource allocation ("/"). Any Medal Rate drops from 35.1% to
    26.7%. Despite faster First-Medal time (2.9h→1.7h), the system rushes to local optima without
    temporal adaptation, matching the performance degradation observed in methods like AIDE.
  • w/o Exploration Path (28% relative decline). The most severe degradation occurs when
    degrading Adaptive path structuring to sequential chain exploration (similar to MLE-STAR (Nam
    et al., 2025)). Any Medal Rate drops to 25.3% and average loops fall dramatically (45.9→19.4),
    demonstrating how tree-based adaptive exploration fundamentally outperforms rigid chain
    structures in solution space coverage.


                                                  8
  • w/o Reasoning Pipeline (24% relative decline). Degrading our Scientific multi-step reasoning
    to baseline one-step approaches used by prior methods. Any Medal Rate drops to 26.7% and
    Improve Rate collapses (41.1%→23.0%). Despite high exploration volume (55.3 loops), the
    system generates improvements in only 23% of loops, highlighting how structured multi-step
    reasoning enables more effective hypothesis generation than simple one-step approaches.

  • w/o Memory Context (9% relative decline). Degrading component Memory Context from Col-
    laborative Communication to a simple memory management approach(similar to ML-Master (Liu
    et al., 2025)), showing the smallest degradation to 32.0% Any Medal Rate. The preserved itera-
    tion efficiency suggests that while collaborative memory provides optimization benefits, core
    learning mechanisms remain functional through alternative pathways, validating our architectural
    separation between fundamental and enhancement components.

These results demonstrate that R&D-Agent’s superior performance stems from architectural in-
novations, with exploration path structuring providing the most critical advantage over existing
approaches.

4.3.2   D EVELOPMENT P HASE A BLATION S TUDY
Unlike research components that affect idea generation, development components impact solution
implementation quality and reliability. We analyze their contributions through temporal medal
acquisition patterns over 12 hours, as shown in Figure 3. This temporal approach reveals not just
final performance, but also when and how quickly each component contributes to success. Results
combine ablation studies with one representative run from the primary experiment, illustrating the
temporal dynamics of development components.

Perfect Selection (Upper Bound). Theoretical maximum performance if we could submit all
generated solutions and select the best performer. This oracle bound reaches 37.3% Any Medal Rate,
establishing our solution pool’s upper limit.

Full System. Exhibits rapid initial progress (0-2h), steady refinement (2-6h), and convergence
at 34.7% Any Medal Rate. Achieving 93% of perfect selection demonstrates effective solution
identification without test set access.

W/o Coding Workflow. Degrading our Efficient &
Iterative Debug workflow forces the system to use
full-dataset debugging like baseline methods. Perfor-
mance drops immediately to 24.0% Any Medal Rate
and remains persistently degraded. This demonstrates
that our sample-based debugging fundamentally out-
performs traditional full-dataset approaches, where
computational overhead severely constrains explo-
ration within time budgets—the same bottleneck that
limits existing systems.

W/o Evaluation Strategy. Degrading our Aggre-
gated evaluation strategy to baseline approaches
without systematic evaluation. Performance initially
matches the full system until hour 2, then diverges Figure 3: Development Phase Temporal Ab-
significantly to 30.7% Any Medal Rate. This delayed lation. Medal acquisition rate (percentage of
degradation shows that while basic evaluation suffices 75 competitions) over 12 hours reveals when
for simple solutions, sophisticated multi-dimensional and how each component contributes.
evaluation becomes critical as solution complexity
and over-fit risk increases-an advantage absent in existing methods.

These temporal patterns show how R&D-Agent’s development innovations address fundamental
bottlenecks overlooked by prior work: coding workflow provides implementation efficiency from the
start, while evaluation strategy enables sustained improvement as solutions grow sophisticated.


                                                 9
5   R ELATED W ORK I N A PPENDIX A
6   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced R&D-Agent, a comprehensive and decoupled framework that transforms
MLE agent design from monolithic construction into systematic exploration. We proposed explicit
phase separation between research and development as the core design principle, implemented through
six extensible and modular components that enable efficient exploration of complex solutions.
Guided by human-expert workflows, we discovered an optimal configuration that achieves 35.1%
Any-Medal Rate on MLE-Bench, establishing a new state-of-the-art despite operating with more
limited computational resources than prior work. Comprehensive ablation studies validate the
contribution of each component, confirming that our framework’s extensible architecture, rather than
merely improved model capabilities, is the key driver of these performance gains.
R&D-Agent enables researchers to systematically test and compare different agent architectures
within a unified framework, eliminating the need to rebuild entire systems from scratch. The
framework’s modularity allows precise attribution of performance gains to specific components,
transforming agent development from trial-and-error into principled experimentation. By open-
sourcing both the framework and our discovered configurations, we provide the ML community with
immediately deployable solutions and a platform for further innovation in autonomous AI systems.




                                                10
R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
To ensure reproducibility of our work, we provide comprehensive implementation details and re-
sources throughout the paper and supplementary materials. The complete source code for the
R&D-Agent framework, including all six modular components and our discovered optimal config-
uration, is available as anonymous supplementary material. Algorithm 1 presents the high-level
framework structure, with detailed component implementations described in Section 3.3. Complete
prompts and technical specifications for each component are provided in Appendix E. Our exper-
imental setup is fully specified in Section 4.1, including hardware environment, time constraints,
and evaluation protocol on MLE-Bench. All reported results represent mean ± SEM across three
independent runs with different random seeds to ensure statistical robustness. Upon acceptance, we
will publicly release the complete codebase with documentation and tutorials.

E THICS S TATEMENT
Our work on R&D-Agent is guided by a commitment to contribute to society and human well-
being by responsibly augmenting data science practice rather than replacing expert judgment. We
uphold high standards of scientific excellence through rigorous evaluation on public, appropriately
licensed datasets, reproducible ablations, and transparent reporting of assumptions, limitations, and
negative results. To avoid harm, we do not use sensitive or personally identifiable data, we encourage
domain-appropriate oversight for any deployment, and we design workflows that minimize misuse
and leakage of credentials or private materials. We are honest, trustworthy, and transparent about
methods, data, and outcomes; we seek fairness and take action to avoid discrimination by monitoring
for bias and refraining from using protected attributes in ways that could lead to disparate impact.
We respect the work required to produce new ideas and artefacts through proper citation and license
compliance, and we respect privacy and honour confidentiality by safeguarding any proprietary assets
shared in evaluation and by preventing unauthorized disclosure.

R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman,
  Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Moez Ali. PyCaret: An open source, low-code machine learning library in Python, April 2020. URL
 https://www.pycaret.org. PyCaret version 1.0.0.
Jun Shern Chan, Neil Chowdhury, Oliver Jaffe, James Aung, Dane Sherburn, Evan Mays, Giulio
  Starace, Kevin Liu, Leon Maksin, Tejal Patwardhan, et al. Mle-bench: Evaluating machine learning
  agents on machine learning engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07095, 2024.
Nick Erickson, Jonas Mueller, Alexander Shirkov, Hang Zhang, Pedro Larroy, Mu Li, and Alexander
  Smola. Autogluon-tabular: Robust and accurate automl for structured data. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2003.06505, 2020.
Behrooz Ghorbani, Orhan Firat, Markus Freitag, Ankur Bapna, Maxim Krikun, Xavier Garcia,
  Ciprian Chelba, and Colin Cherry. Scaling laws for neural machine translation. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Alex Graves. Long short-term memory. Supervised sequence labelling with recurrent neural
  networks, pp. 37–45, 2012.
HeyNeo Team. Neo: Next-generation ai agents. https://heyneo.so/blog, 2025.
Qian Huang, Jian Vora, Percy Liang, and Jure Leskovec. Mlagentbench: Evaluating language agents
  on machine learning experimentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03302, 2023.
Akira Isihara. Statistical physics. Academic Press, 2013.
Berivan Isik, Natalia Ponomareva, Hussein Hazimeh, Dimitris Paparas, Sergei Vassilvitskii, and
  Sanmi Koyejo. Scaling laws for downstream task performance in machine translation. In The
  Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.


                                                 11
Zhengyao Jiang, Dominik Schmidt, Dhruv Srikanth, Dixing Xu, Ian Kaplan, Deniss Jacenko, and
  Yuxiang Wu. Aide: Ai-driven exploration in the space of code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13138,
  2025.
Liqiang Jing, Zhehui Huang, Xiaoyang Wang, Wenlin Yao, Wenhao Yu, Kaixin Ma, Hongming
  Zhang, Xinya Du, and Dong Yu. Dsbench: How far are data science agents to becoming data
  science experts? arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.07703, 2024.
Stepan Kulibaba, Artem Dzhalilov, Roman Pakhomov, Oleg Svidchenko, Alexander Gasnikov, and
  Aleksei Shpilman. Kompeteai: Accelerated autonomous multi-agent system for end-to-end pipeline
  generation for machine learning problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10177, 2025.
Lei Liang, Zhongpu Bo, Zhengke Gui, Zhongshu Zhu, Ling Zhong, Peilong Zhao, Mengshu Sun,
  Zhiqiang Zhang, Jun Zhou, Wenguang Chen, et al. Kag: Boosting llms in professional domains via
  knowledge augmented generation. In Companion Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference
  2025, pp. 334–343, 2025.
Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao,
  Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, et al. Deepseek-v3 technical report. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2412.19437, 2024.
Zexi Liu, Yuzhu Cai, Xinyu Zhu, Yujie Zheng, Runkun Chen, Ying Wen, Yanfeng Wang, Siheng
  Chen, et al. Ml-master: Towards ai-for-ai via integration of exploration and reasoning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2506.16499, 2025.
Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Harshit Surana, Dhruv Agarwal, Bhavana Dalvi Mishra, Abhi-
  jeetsingh Meena, Aryan Prakhar, Tirth Vora, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, and Peter Clark.
  Discoverybench: Towards data-driven discovery with large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2407.01725, 2024.
Aigerim Mansurova, Aiganym Mansurova, and Aliya Nugumanova. Qa-rag: Exploring llm reliance
  on external knowledge. Big Data and Cognitive Computing, 8(9):115, 2024.
Jaehyun Nam, Jinsung Yoon, Jiefeng Chen, Jinwoo Shin, Sercan Ö Arık, and Tomas Pfister. Mle-
  star: Machine learning engineering agent via search and targeted refinement. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2506.15692, 2025.
Gaurav Sahu, Abhay Puri, Juan Rodriguez, Amirhossein Abaskohi, Mohammad Chegini, Alexan-
  dre Drouin, Perouz Taslakian, Valentina Zantedeschi, Alexandre Lacoste, David Vazquez, et al.
  Insightbench: Evaluating business analytics agents through multi-step insight generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2407.06423, 2024.
Mohammad Shahab Sepehri, Zalan Fabian, Maryam Soltanolkotabi, and Mahdi Soltanolkotabi.
 Mediconfusion: Can you trust your ai radiologist? probing the reliability of multimodal medical
 foundation models. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations,
 2025.
Zhiqiang Tang, Haoyang Fang, Su Zhou, Taojiannan Yang, Zihan Zhong, Tony Hu, Katrin Kirchhoff,
  and George Karypis. Autogluon-multimodal (automm): Supercharging multimodal automl with
  foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16233, 2024.
Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu Soricut,
  Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, Katie Millican, et al. Gemini: a family of highly
  capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.
NovelSeek Team, Bo Zhang, Shiyang Feng, Xiangchao Yan, Jiakang Yuan, Zhiyin Yu, Xiaohan He,
  Songtao Huang, Shaowei Hou, Zheng Nie, et al. Novelseek: When agent becomes the scientist–
  building closed-loop system from hypothesis to verification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.16938,
  2025.
Edan Toledo, Karen Hambardzumyan, Martin Josifoski, Rishi Hazra, Nicolas Baldwin, Alexis
  Audran-Reiss, Michael Kuchnik, Despoina Magka, Minqi Jiang, Alisia Maria Lupidi, et al. Ai
  research agents for machine learning: Search, exploration, and generalization in mle-bench. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2507.02554, 2025.


                                                12
Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi Pan,
  Yueqi Song, Bowen Li, Jaskirat Singh, et al. Openhands: An open platform for ai software
  developers as generalist agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.16741, 2024.
Yuzhe Yang, Yifei Zhang, Minghao Wu, Kaidi Zhang, Yunmiao Zhang, Honghai Yu, Yan Hu, and
  Benyou Wang. Twinmarket: A scalable behavioral and social simulation for financial markets.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.01506, 2025.
Yiwen Yuan, Zecheng Zhang, Xinwei He, Akihiro Nitta, Weihua Hu, Dong Wang, Manan Shah,
  Shenyang Huang, Blaž Stojanovič, Alan Krumholz, et al. Contextgnn: Beyond two-tower recom-
  mendation systems. In Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.




                                             13
A PPENDIX
A     R ELATED W ORK
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have enabled the development of general-purpose
agents capable of performing complex reasoning, planning, and decision-making across a wide
range of domains (Achiam et al., 2023; Team et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024). In the context of data-
science(Chan et al., 2024; Jing et al., 2024; Majumder et al., 2024; Sahu et al., 2024; Huang et al.,
2023), these agents have demonstrated the potential to markedly improve efficiency and effectiveness
across diverse tasks, surpassing traditional automated methods in several benchmark evaluations.
Machine learning engineering (MLE) is a rapidly growing subfield of data science, which directly
delivers runnable machine learning solutions, MLE-Bench(Chan et al., 2024) is the most widely
adopted for evaluating general LLM-based MLE agents, as it draws from real Kaggle competitions
and incorporates human expert solutions for direct performance comparison, offering both realism
and rigor.
Research into automating MLE workflows has progressed along two complementary directions.
The first comprises highly encapsulated AutoML frameworks such as PyCaret (Ali, 2020) and
AutoGluon (Erickson et al., 2020; Tang et al., 2024), which offer predefined modeling pipelines
and automated hyperparameter optimization. The second involves LLM-driven AutoML agents
that leverage the reasoning and coding abilities of LLMs to dynamically design and refine machine
learning solutions. Some early methods (Jing et al., 2024) enabled agents to iteratively improve a
solution within a fixed scaffold, achieving promising results in a small set of concrete scenarios, but
they failed to generalize to broader MLE tasks. Therefore, a series of subsequent methods aimed
at general MLE have emerged. Examples include AIDE (Jiang et al., 2025), ML-Master (Liu et al.,
2025), KompeteAI (Kulibaba et al., 2025), and MLE-STAR (Nam et al., 2025), which differ in their
exploration path structures, coding workflows, and reasoning pipelines. Framework-oriented efforts,
such as AIRA (Toledo et al., 2025), show how flexible design space exploration can support adaptive
reasoning strategies. More recently, closed-source systems like Neo (HeyNeo Team, 2025) and
InternAgent (data science version) (Team et al., 2025) have achieved state-of-the-art performance,
but provide little transparency about their internal designs.
These explorations show the need for a comprehensive, extensible framework for systematic design
space exploration. We introduce R&D-Agent, which unifies and generalizes prior MLE agent designs
by separating the strategic research phase from the tactical development phase, enabling diverse
strategy integration and achieving state-of-the-art MLE-Bench results under stricter time limits.

B     LLM U SAGE S TATEMENT
We used LLMs solely as general-purpose writing assistants to improve grammar, refine sentence
structure, and ensure style consistency throughout the manuscript. The LLMs did not contribute to
the core research ideas, framework design, experimental methodology, or interpretation of results. All
research contributions, including the R&D-Agent framework design, experimental setup, and analysis,
were developed entirely by the authors. The use of LLMs in our experiments (as the backend for
R&D-Agent) is part of the research methodology itself and is fully documented in the experimental
sections.

C     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
C.1   P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS ACROSS D IFFERENT BACKEND LLM S
We evaluated R&D-Agent’s adaptability using three LLM configurations: GPT-4.1 only, o3 only, and
hybrid o3(R)+GPT-4.1(D). Figure 4 presents the results on MLE-Bench.
The results demonstrate two key findings. First, o3 only significantly outperforms GPT-4.1 only,
confirming that reasoning-enhanced models are critical for autonomous ML engineering. Second
and more importantly, the hybrid configuration achieves 29.3% Any-Medal Rate, surpassing both
single-model setups. This 4.0 percentage point improvement over o3 only indicates that our dual-
phase architecture creates synergistic benefits beyond simple model substitution, assigning reasoning
models to research and code generators to development yields a 57% relative improvement over
GPT-4.1 only.


                                                 14
                              30%                                                      29.3%
                                                               25.3%
                              25%

         Any Medal Rate (%)   20%     18.6%

                              15%

                              10%

                              5%

                              0%
                                    GPT-4.1 only               o3 only            o3(R) + GPT-4.1(D)

Figure 4: Performance comparison of R&D-Agent across different backend LLM configurations. The
hybrid configuration achieves superior performance by leveraging specialized models for each phase.


These findings validate our framework’s core design principle: the modular architecture transforms
the limitation of single-model deployment into an advantage through phase-specific optimization.
Each phase leverages the most suitable model capabilities, enabling both superior performance and
cost-effective deployment where expensive reasoning models are selectively applied. The consistent
performance hierarchy (GPT-4.1 only < o3 only < hybrid) confirms that gains stem from principled
architectural design rather than model-specific tuning.

C.2   E FFECT OF E XTERNAL K NOWLEDGE
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) has emerged as a promising approach for enhancing LLM-
based agents. We investigated how incorporating external knowledge influences our agent’s perfor-
mance across different competition difficulty levels.
We compiled a comprehensive knowledge base from 85 Kaggle competitions (excluding those in
MLE-Bench), containing high-quality notebooks and forum discussions covering diverse competition
types including tabular data, computer vision, NLP, and time series forecasting. Our retrieval strategy
employs embedding-based similarity matching to identify the most relevant knowledge during the
research phase, where external knowledge is retrieved after problem analysis and incorporated as
reference material during solution design.

Table 4: Effect of external knowledge integration on agent performance. Values represent Any-Medal
rates (%) across three runs.

                               Configuration          Low==Lite      Medium     High    Overall
                               R&D-Agent (baseline)     68.2             21.1   22.2      35.1
                               R&D-Agent w/ RAG         54.6             21.1   26.7      32.0

As shown in Table 4, incorporating external knowledge surprisingly harms overall performance, with
particularly severe degradation on Low==Lite tasks. This counterintuitive finding challenges the
prevailing assumption that RAG universally improves LLM capabilities (Mansurova et al., 2024;
Liang et al., 2025).
The only scenario where RAG proves beneficial is for high-difficulty competitions, suggesting that
external knowledge primarily adds value when facing genuinely novel or specialized challenges
beyond the model’s training distribution. For standard ML tasks, we hypothesize that modern
LLMs have already internalized common patterns sufficiently well, and external retrieval introduces


                                                           15
noise that disrupts their problem-solving flow. These findings suggest that RAG should be applied
selectively based on task complexity rather than as a universal enhancement for MLE agents.

C.3     C OMPUTATIONAL E FFICIENCY A NALYSIS
We evaluate R&D-Agent’s computational efficiency compared to existing methods. Table 5 summa-
rizes the runtime and GPU requirements across different agents.

Table 5: Runtime and GPU Specifications of Different Agents. None indicates that the GPU
information was not explicitly stated in the original paper.

                 Agent                          Runtime (h)            GPU
                 MLAB GPT-4o                         24           NVIDIA A10
                 OpenHands GPT-4o                    24           NVIDIA A10
                 AIDE GPT-4o                         24           NVIDIA A10
                 AIDE o1-preview                     24           NVIDIA A10
                 ML-Master Deepseek-R1               12          NVIDIA A100
                 KompeteAI Gemini-2.5-flash           6          NVIDIA A100
                 MLE-STAR Gemini-2.5-pro             24         8× NVIDIA V100
                 MLE-STAR Gemini-2.0-flash           24         8× NVIDIA V100
                 AIRA Greedy                         24          NVIDIA H200
                 AIRA MCTS                           24          NVIDIA H200
                 R&D-Agent GPT-5(ours)               12          NVIDIA V100

R&D-Agent achieves state-of-the-art performance using only a single NVIDIA V100 GPU within 12
hours, demonstrating superior resource efficiency compared to methods requiring multiple GPUs
(e.g., MLE-STAR with 8×V100) or extended runtimes (24 hours for most baselines). The efficiency
advantage that we achieve comparable or better results with 2× less time and 8× fewer GPUs makes
our framework significantly more practical for real-world deployment where computational resources
are constrained.

C.4     C OMPARISON WITH C LOSED -S OURCE S YSTEMS
To assess R&D-Agent’s competitiveness beyond open-source baselines, we compare against recent
closed-source commercial systems on MLE-Bench. As a framework for autonomous ML engineering,
R&D-Agent faces the dual challenge of achieving fully autonomous operation while competing
with proprietary systems that may leverage private datasets, custom infrastructure, and undisclosed
optimizations. Table 6 presents the comparison results.

Table 6: Comparison with Recent Closed-Source MLE-Bench Agents. Values show mean ± SEM.

      Agent                             Time   Low/Lite    Medium         High          All
                                         (h)     (%)        (%)           (%)          (%)
      InternAgent (Team et al., 2025)    12    62.1 ± 3.0 26.3 ± 2.6 24.4 ± 2.2 36.4 ± 1.2
      Neo (HeyNeo Team, 2025)            36    48.5 ± 1.5 29.8 ± 2.3 24.4 ± 2.2 34.2 ± 0.9
      R&D-Agent                          12    68.2 ± 2.6 21.1 ± 1.5 22.2 ± 2.2 35.1 ± 0.4

Despite being fully open-source and operating completely autonomously without human intervention,
R&D-Agent achieves remarkably competitive performance against closed-source systems. The
framework autonomously completes the entire ML pipeline, from problem analysis through solution
implementation to evaluation, approaching InternAgent’s 36.4%. This near-parity performance is
particularly notable given that our autonomous agent surpasses Neo (34.2%) while requiring only
one-third of the runtime (12h vs. 36h), demonstrating that efficient autonomous operation need not
compromise solution quality.


                                                16
    Our framework particularly excels on Low==Lite tasks, where R&D-Agent achieves 68.2%, out-
    performing both closed-source alternatives by substantial margins. This strong performance on
    foundational tasks validates that our architectural innovations—the dual-phase design enabling
    autonomous research and development, modular components for systematic exploration, and stan-
    dardized evaluation protocols—provide fundamental advantages for autonomous ML engineering.
    C.5 E XTENDED A NALYSIS : MLE-B ENCH L ITE R ESULTS
    While our main experiments evaluate agents on the full MLE-Bench dataset, we additionally provide
    detailed comparisons on the MLE-Bench Lite subset for completeness and to facilitate comparison
    with methods that only report Lite results (Kulibaba et al., 2025; Nam et al., 2025). Figure 5 presents
    comprehensive performance comparisons across all agents that have reported results on this subset.

                            80%
                                       68.2±2.6   63.6±6.0
Low==Lite Performance (%)




                            70%                              62.1±3.0
                            60%
                                                                        51.5±1.5
                                                                                    48.5±1.5     48.5±1.5        47.7
                            50%
                            40%                                                                                            34.3±2.4
                            30%
                            20%                                                                                                       11.5±3.4
                            10%                                                                                                                  4.2±1.5
                            0%
                                      T-5 t




                                                             -R1 t
                                                            -pr AR




                                                              sh I




                                                                                                              ee RA



                                                                                                                               iew E



                                                                                                                              T-4 ds
                                                                                    -R1 r



                                                                                                 o




                                                                                                                                               T-4 AB
                                                          -fla teA
                                  GP gen




                                                         ek en




                                                                                  ek te




                                                                                                                            ev ID
                                                                                                 Ne
                                                                o




                                                                                                                                 o



                                                                                                                                                  o
                                                                                                                dy




                                                                                                                           GPHan
                                                        2.5 ST




                                                                                                                                             GP ML
                                                                                                            Gr AI
                                                                                se as
                                                       se Ag




                                                                                                                         -pr A
                                                      2.5 pe
                                     A


                                                     ni- E-




                                                                              ep L-M
                                  D-




                                                    ep rn




                                                                                                                           en
                                                   ni- om
                                                  mi ML


                                                 De Inte
                              R&




                                                                                                                        Op
                                                                            De M
                                                 mi K




                                                                                                                      o1
                                          Ge




                                              Ge




    Figure 5: Agent performance on MLE-Bench (Lite). Each value represents the mean performance
    across all benchmark tasks, with the value after “±” indicating SEM. For the AIRA agents, the
    reported value is 0 because the original paper did not provide explicit results.

    On the Lite subset, R&D-Agent achieves 68.2 ± 2.6%, establishing the highest performance among
    all evaluated systems. This represents a 4.6 percentage point improvement over the previous best result
    of 63.6 ± 6.0% (MLE-STAR with Gemini-2.5-pro), despite using significantly fewer computational
    resources (as detailed in Appendix C.3). The performance progression from early agents (MLAB
    at 4.2 ± 1.5%) to current state-of-the-art demonstrates the rapid advancement in autonomous ML
    engineering capabilities.

     D                        E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS AND S UPPLEMENTARY R ESULTS
    This section provides comprehensive experimental details and supplementary analysis to complement
    the main results, including detailed performance breakdowns and experimental design specifications.
    D.1 R AW M AIN E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
    Table 7 shows complete performance metrics for both R&D-Agent configurations across all three
    independent runs, providing transparency into the variability and statistical robustness of our experi-
    mental.
    D.2 C OST A NALYSIS
    One critical advantage of R&D-Agent is its exceptional cost efficiency. Table 8 presents the compu-
    tational costs per competition across three independent runs with GPT-5 in the main experiments,
    demonstrating that our framework achieves state-of-the-art performance at remarkably low costs.
    At approximately $21 per competition, R&D-Agent achieves medal-winning performance at a fraction
    of traditional computational costs. This cost efficiency is particularly significant when compared
    to typical ML engineering workflows, which often require extensive hyperparameter tuning, model
    selection, and ensemble training that can consume hundreds or thousands of dollars in computational


                                                                                            17
Table 7: Complete performance metrics for R&D-Agent configurations across three independent runs

 Configuration                  Valid Sub.    Above Median      Bronze    Silver   Gold    Any Medal
                                   (%)            (%)            (%)       (%)     (%)        (%)
                                   96.0            45.3          6.7       12.0    17.3       36.0
 R&D-Agent (GPT-5)                 96.0            45.3          4.0       13.4    17.3       34.7
                                   96.0            45.3          9.3       10.7    14.7       34.7
                                   94.7            45.3          8.0        5.3    17.3       30.6
 R&D-Agent (o3+GPT-4.1)            93.3            44.0          5.3        8.0    16.0       29.3
                                   94.7            45.3          5.3        9.3    14.7       29.3


Table 8: Average computational cost per competition for R&D-Agent (GPT-5) across three runs (in
USD)

            Run          Research Phase        Development Phase            Total Cost
                        (per competition)       (per competition)        (per competition)
            Run 1              $4.68                   $11.14                 $15.82
            Run 2              $7.85                   $14.37                 $22.22
            Run 3              $8.43                   $15.75                 $24.18
            Average            $6.99                   $13.75                 $20.74


resources. The framework’s ability to autonomously complete complex ML tasks from data analysis
through model development to final submission at such low costs represents a substantial reduction in
the barrier to entry for competitive ML engineering. This democratization of access enables academic
researchers, small organizations, and individual practitioners to engage in advanced ML development
without requiring substantial computational budgets, potentially accelerating innovation across the
broader ML community.

D.3    M EMORY C ONTEXT D ESIGN
Existing MLE agents employ various strategies for managing information across exploration traces.
MCTS-based methods achieve global information integration but often converge prematurely, while
AIDE maintains independent branches with greedy exploitation followed by late-stage merging. Kom-
peteAI combines different architectural components without explicit cross-branch communication.
These approaches face a fundamental trade-off: maintaining branch independence preserves diversity
but sacrifices efficiency through redundant exploration and missed knowledge transfer opportunities.
Our memory context design addresses this trade-off by enabling controlled information exchange
between otherwise independent branches. While diversity emerges naturally from different initial-
ization points and exploration paths, the lack of communication between branches leads to critical
inefficiencies: (i) successful hypotheses discovered in one branch cannot inform others, making it
difficult for branches to quickly reach optimal solutions; (ii) historical information from different
branches cannot be fully utilized, since each branch evolves independently without access to others’
past states.
To address these limitations, we introduce a probabilistic interaction mechanism inspired by statistical
physics (Isihara, 2013). After generating hypotheses in each branch, we apply a probabilistic
interaction kernel over all candidate hypotheses, thereby simulating the interaction process observed
in physical systems.
D.3.1 C ANDIDATE H YPOTHESIS C ONSTRUCTION
We construct the candidate pool from three complementary sources:
      1. hc : Hypotheses proposed by the current main branch, designed as solutions based on the
         problem in the current branch


                                                  18
       2. h⋆ : Globally optimal hypotheses from the highest-scoring loops in other branches (or
          possibly from the branch itself)
       3. hs : Hypotheses obtained by sampling the kernel of probabilistic interaction
The interaction kernel is formulated as:
                                                                exp(Uij )
  Uij = αSij e−γL + β tanh(∆ij ) ∈ [−2, 2],              pij = P            ,         hs ∼ Categorical(pij ) (1)
                                                                k exp(Uik )

where Uij is the interaction potential between hypothesis hci and all historical hypothesis hj . The
parameters α and β are weights controlling the relative importance of the similarity Sij (cosine
similarity between embeddings of hci and hj ) and score difference ∆ij . The parameter γ is a decay
factor based on the path length L.
The score difference ∆ij is defined as:
                                    ⋆
                                     s − s⋆ ,            if higher score is better
                            ∆ij = j⋆                                                                               (2)
                                     s − s⋆j ,           if lower score is better
where s⋆ is the best score across all branches (global best), and s⋆j is the best score in the current
branch. The final candidate hypotheses are Hcand = {hc1 , . . . , hcm } ∪ {h⋆ } ∪ {hs1 , . . . , hsn }.
This interaction potential function integrates both information from the hypothesis text and the score.
The decay factor e−γL applied to the hypothesis information reflects that the trajectory is not a
Markov process, the generation of later hypotheses depends on multiple previous steps. Therefore, in
the later stages of exploration, we want the weight of this component to decay rapidly, so that the
score information plays a more dominant role.
D.3.2 A DAPTIVE H YPOTHESIS S ELECTION
In the second step, we use an LLM to select from these candidate hypotheses. In the LLM selection
algorithm, we do not intend to strictly constrain the range of hypotheses. The provided candidate
hypotheses serve only as a reference. Rather than being limited to selecting a single candidate
hypothesis, the prompt suggests three possible actions: (1) Select: choose the best hypothesis from
the candidate set; (2) Modify: revise an existing candidate hypothesis to improve it; (3) Generate:
create a new hypothesis based on the candidate hypotheses. This design aims to reduce hallucinations
and stabilize the outcomes across different traces.
Algorithm 2 presents the detailed selection process, which adapts its strategy based on the exploration
stage and remaining time budget.

Algorithm 2: LLM-Based Hypothesis Selection
Require: Candidate hypotheses Hcand = {hc1 , . . . , hcm } ∪ {h⋆ } ∪ {hs1 , . . . , hsn }, current SOTA
  score s⋆j , s⋆ global best score, time budget T
Ensure: Selected or generated hypothesis ho
  // Candidate hypotheses Hcand are for reference only
  If s⋆j ≤ s⋆ (higher score is better), prioritize {h⋆ } ∪ {hs1 , . . . , hsn }; else prioritize {hc1 , . . . , hcm }
  Draft Stage: Focus on simple, quick-to-implement hypotheses
      • Select: Pick the most promising hypothesis from candidates
      • Modify: Adjust candidate (hyperparameters, loss, augmentations)
      • Create: Integrate advantages from multiple candidates or historical hypotheses
  Improvement Stage: Focus on meaningful gains without overcomplicating
      • Select: Pick the single most promising candidate
      • Modify: Refine candidate for faster iteration and improved gain
      • Create: Combine best parts of candidates into a new hypothesis
  Multi-trace Merge Stage (Final): Integrate best solutions across all traces
      • Select: Identify complementary solutions from different traces
      • Modify: Adapt solutions from other traces to current context
      • Create: Synthesize strengths from multiple traces into unified solution
  Return ho


                                                         19
This adaptive selection mechanism, combined with the probabilistic interaction kernel, enables
efficient cross-branch learning without sacrificing exploration diversity. The stage-aware strategy
progresses from rapid exploration (Draft) through focused improvement to final multi-trace integra-
tion, ensuring that the system leverages the collective discoveries from all parallel explorations. The
multi-trace merge stage specifically enables the synthesis of complementary solutions discovered
independently, maximizing the benefit of our parallel exploration architecture.
D.4 C OMPETITION S UBSET FOR A BLATION S TUDIES
Table 10 lists the complete set of 40 competitions used in our development phase ablation experiments.
These competitions represent a diverse range of machine learning tasks, including classification,
regression, and time-series forecasting challenges across tabular, text, image, and multimodal data
types.
D.5 C OMPARATIVE BASELINE M EDAL ACHIEVEMENT S TATISTICS
To provide comprehensive context for evaluating R&D-Agent’s performance, we present detailed
medal achievement statistics for competing baseline systems across the MLE-Bench evaluation set.
This analysis examines the consistency and reliability of different agent configurations across multiple
independent runs.
Table 9 summarizes the medal achievement frequency for two prominent baseline configurations: o3-
4.1 and GPT-5, each evaluated across three independent runs on 75 Kaggle competitions. The results
demonstrate significant variation in performance consistency across different model configurations.

Table 9: Medal achievement statistics for baseline agent configurations across 75 MLE-Bench
competitions. Each configuration was evaluated across three independent runs. Values represent the
number of medals achieved per competition (0-3).

 Competition                                     ML-Master ML-Master R&D-Agent R&D-Agent
                                                 o3+GPT4.1  GPT-5      GPT-5   o3+GPT4.1
 inaturalist-2019-fgvc6                                0            0             3             3
 plant-pathology-2020-fgvc7                            1            2             3             3
 h-and-m-personalized-fashion-recommendations          2            0             0             0
 the-icml-2013-whale-challenge-right-whale-            1            2             3             3
 redux
 jigsaw-toxic-comment-classification-challenge         0            0             2             0
 detecting-insults-in-social-commentary                3            1             3             3
 aptos2019-blindness-detection                         1            0             2             2
 iwildcam-2020-fgvc7                                   2            0             2             3
 us-patent-phrase-to-phrase-matching                   0            0             0             1
 hotel-id-2021-fgvc8                                   3            2             3             3
 freesound-audio-tagging-2019                          0            0             0             0
 rsna-miccai-brain-tumor-radiogenomic-                 2            0             1             1
 classification
 text-normalization-challenge-russian-language         0            1             3             2
 spooky-author-identification                          0            0             3             1
 tabular-playground-series-dec-2021                    3            2             3             3
 herbarium-2022-fgvc9                                  1            0             0             0
 herbarium-2020-fgvc7                                  0            0             3             2
 plant-pathology-2021-fgvc8                            3            3             3             3
 google-quest-challenge                                0            1             3             3
 stanford-covid-vaccine                                0            2             3             2
 random-acts-of-pizza                                  0            3             3             1
 herbarium-2021-fgvc8                                  1            0             1             0
 leaf-classification                                   0            0             2             0
 nomad2018-predict-transparent-conductors              3            3             3             3
 aerial-cactus-identification                          0            1             2             2
 seti-breakthrough-listen                              1            0             1             1
                                                                                Continued on next page


                                                  20
                                 Table 9 – continued from previous page
Competition                                         ML-Master ML-Master R&D-Agent R&D-Agent
                                                    o3+GPT4.1  GPT-5      GPT-5   o3+GPT4.1
kuzushiji-recognition                                     0        0       1          0
cassava-leaf-disease-classification                       0        0       0          0
predict-volcanic-eruptions-ingv-oe                        2        2       3          3
whale-categorization-playground                           0        0       0          2
learning-agency-lab-automated-essay-scoring-2             0        0       1          0
3d-object-detection-for-autonomous-vehicles               0        1       0          0
histopathologic-cancer-detection                          3        3       3          3
dogs-vs-cats-redux-kernels-edition                        3        2       3          3
tweet-sentiment-extraction                                0        0       0          0
mlsp-2013-birds                                           0        0       1          0
iwildcam-2019-fgvc6                                       3        3       3          3
text-normalization-challenge-english-language             2        1       3          2
denoising-dirty-documents                                 1        3       3          3
google-research-identify-contrails-reduce-                0        0       0          0
global-warming
imet-2020-fgvc7                                           0        0       0          0
rsna-2022-cervical-spine-fracture-detection               0        0       0          0
vesuvius-challenge-ink-detection                          0        0       0          0
tabular-playground-series-may-2022                        0        0       0          0
alaska2-image-steganalysis                                0        0       0          0
tensorflow2-question-answering                            0        0       0          0
dog-breed-identification                                  0        0       0          0
siim-isic-melanoma-classification                         0        0       0          0
osic-pulmonary-fibrosis-progression                       0        0       0          0
vinbigdata-chest-xray-abnormalities-detection             0        0       0          0
ranzcr-clip-catheter-line-classification                  0        0       0          0
lmsys-chatbot-arena                                       0        0       0          0
tensorflow-speech-recognition-challenge                   0        0       0          0
champs-scalar-coupling                                    0        0       0          0
statoil-iceberg-classifier-challenge                      0        0       0          0
jigsaw-unintended-bias-in-toxicity-classification         0        0       0          0
tgs-salt-identification-challenge                         0        0       0          0
bms-molecular-translation                                 0        0       0          0
billion-word-imputation                                   0        0       0          0
smartphone-decimeter-2022                                 0        0       0          0
facebook-recruiting-iii-keyword-extraction                0        0       0          0
rsna-breast-cancer-detection                              0        0       0          0
icecube-neutrinos-in-deep-ice                             0        0       0          0
ventilator-pressure-prediction                            0        0       0          0
nfl-player-contact-detection                              0        0       0          0
siim-covid19-detection                                    0        0       0          0
hubmap-kidney-segmentation                                0        0       3          2
hms-harmful-brain-activity-classification                 0        0       0          0
AI4Code                                                   0        0       0          0
chaii-hindi-and-tamil-question-answering                  0        0       0          0
petfinder-pawpularity-score                               0        0       0          0
multi-modal-gesture-recognition                           0        0       0          0
new-york-city-taxi-fare-prediction                        0        0       0          0
cdiscount-image-classification-challenge                  0        0       0          0
uw-madison-gi-tract-image-segmentation                    0        0       0          0




                                                     21
Table 10: Complete list of 40 MLE-Bench competitions used for development phase ablation studies

     ID     Competition Name                                Category               Complexity

     1      3d-object-detection-for-autonomous-vehicles     Image Segmentation     High
     2      aerial-cactus-identification                    Image Classification   Low
     3      aptos2019-blindness-detection                   Image Classification   Low
     4      cassava-leaf-disease-classification             Image Classification   Medium
     5      denoising-dirty-documents                       Image to Image         Low
     6      detecting-insults-in-social-commentary          Text Classification    Low
     7      dogs-vs-cats-redux-kernels-edition              Image Classification   Low
     8      freesound-audio-tagging-2019                    Audio Classification   Medium
     9      google-quest-challenge                          Training LLMs          Medium
     10     h-and-m-personalized-fashion-                   Tabular                Medium
            recommendations
     11     herbarium-2020-fgvc7                            Image Classification   Medium
     12     herbarium-2021-fgvc8                            Image Classification   Medium
     13     herbarium-2022-fgvc9                            Image Classification   Medium
     14     histopathologic-cancer-detection                Image (Other)          Low
     15     hotel-id-2021-fgvc8                             Image Classification   Medium
     16     hubmap-kidney-segmentation                      Image Segmentation     Medium
     17     inaturalist-2019-fgvc6                          Image Classification   Medium
     18     iwildcam-2019-fgvc6                             Image Classification   High
     19     iwildcam-2020-fgvc7                             Image Classification   Medium
     20     jigsaw-toxic-comment-classification-challenge   Text Classification    Low
     21     kuzushiji-recognition                           Image Classification   Medium
     22     leaf-classification                             Image Classification   Low
     23     learning-agency-lab-automated-essay-scoring-    Text Classification    Medium
            2
     24     mlsp-2013-birds                                 Audio Classification   Low
     25     nomad2018-predict-transparent-conductors        Tabular                Low
     26     plant-pathology-2020-fgvc7                      Image Classification   Low
     27     plant-pathology-2021-fgvc8                      Image Classification   Medium
     28     predict-volcanic-eruptions-ingv-oe              Signal Processing      High
     29     random-acts-of-pizza                            Text Classification    Low
     30     rsna-miccai-brain-tumor-radiogenomic-           Image (Other)          High
            classification
     31     seti-breakthrough-listen                        Signal Processing      Medium
     32     spooky-author-identification                    Text Classification    Low
     33     stanford-covid-vaccine                          Tabular                High
     34     tabular-playground-series-dec-2021              Tabular                Low
     35     text-normalization-challenge-english-language   Sequence to Sequence   Low
     36     text-normalization-challenge-russian-language   Sequence to Sequence   Low
     37     the-icml-2013-whale-challenge-right-whale-      Audio Classification   Low
            redux
     38     tweet-sentiment-extraction                      Text Classification    Medium
     39     us-patent-phrase-to-phrase-matching             Text (Other)           Medium
     40     whale-categorization-playground                 Image Classification   Medium



                                                     22
E      P ROMPT
E.1     P LANNING
The Planning component implements dynamic time-aware strategy selection, adapting experimental
approaches based on remaining computational budget and current exploration state. Rather than
relying on fixed schedules, it dynamically evaluates the exploration trace and remaining time to
determine the optimal balance between breadth and depth of exploration.

      Competition Analysis Prompt —– Planning Component

      You are a data science assistant that extracts structured information from unstructured text.
      The user will provide you a Kaggle competition description, and you need to extract specific
      details from it.
      Please answer in json format with the following schema:
              • “Task Type”: The type of competition task, e.g., ‘Classification’, ‘Regression’,
                ‘Time-Series Forecasting’
              • “Data Type”: The type of competition data, e.g., ‘Tabular’, ‘Time Series’, ‘Text’,
                ‘Image’, ‘Audio’
              • “Brief Description”: A brief description of the competition
              • “Dataset Description”: The dataset structure based on processed data folder de-
                scription
              • “Submission Specifications”: The submission specification & sample submission
                file descriptions
              • “Metric Evaluation Description”: A precise explanation of how submissions are
                scored
              • “Metric Name”: The name of the metric which this competition uses for scoring
              • “Metric Direction”: True or False as True means bigger metric number is better
              • “Longer time limit required”: True or False, whether the scenario requires a longer
                time limit

      Dynamic Expert Role Assignment —– Planning Component

      You are a world-class data scientist and machine learning engineer with deep expertise in
      statistics, mathematics, and computer science. Your knowledge spans cutting-edge data
      analysis techniques, advanced machine learning algorithms, and their practical applications.
      The task type for this competition is {{ task_type }}. The data type used in this competition
      is {{ data_type }}.
      Briefly, the competition involves: {{ brief_description }}.
      The evaluation metric of this competition is: {{ metric_description }}.
      Dynamic Time Management:
              • Your execution is limited to {{ time_limit }} when specified
              • Recommended time budget: {{ recommend_time_limit }} for efficiency
              • Leverage all computational resources during the allocated time


E.2     E XPLORATION PATH S TRUCTURING
The Exploration Path Structuring component manages parallel exploration across multiple solution
traces, implementing intelligent merging strategies and diversity-aware selection mechanisms. It coor-
dinates the systematic exploration of the solution space through structured branching and convergence
protocols.

      Intelligent SOTA Selection —– Exploration Path Structuring Component

      You are an expert Kaggle competitor. You are given a list of SOTA experiments and feedbacks
      for a Kaggle competition. You are tasked with reviewing the list of SOTA experiments and
      feedbacks, and selecting the most promising experiment to submit.
      Principles for Selection:



                                                   23
          1. Valid Score as Primary Criterion: The valid score in the feedbacks is the most
             crucial information and should be considered first. Also consider generalizability
             and risk of overfitting when scores are close.
          2. Generalizability:
                • Data Diversity: Solutions leveraging more diverse data or input modalities
                  should be favored
                • Stable Information: Solutions that are stable and converge faster should be
                  prioritized
                • Refined Representations: Models with better generalized, robust features
                  should be favored
          3. Risk of Overfitting:
                • Be cautious of solutions with high valid scores that might overfit training data
                • Ensure consistent performance across different validation folds
                • Avoid significant performance fluctuations
      Output Format:
 1    {
 2        "selected_SOTA_idx": [positive integer or None],
 3        "explanation": "Brief explanation for selection"
 4    }



      Multi-Trace Solution Merging —– Exploration Path Structuring Component

      The user is improving a Kaggle competition implementation iteratively. Your task is to merge
      multiple solutions to create a better version that combines the strengths of multiple solutions
      while discarding their weaknesses, to create a new version that is better than any of the given
      solutions alone.
      Input Structure:
            1. Previous Main Solution: The main solution you will build on to create an improved
               version
            2. Solutions to be merged: Multiple trials of solutions that you will combine with the
               previous main solution. For each solution to be merged, you will receive:
                   • Solution Description: The approach or method used in this solution
                   • Feedback to the Solution: Steps or changes that led to success, or failure
                     analysis
      Merging Strategy: Systematically analyze the successful components from each solution
      and integrate them while avoiding known failure patterns from the feedback history.


E.3       R EASONING P IPELINE
The Reasoning Pipeline component orchestrates systematic hypothesis formulation through structured
scientific reasoning, implementing multi-dimensional problem identification and rigorous evalua-
tion protocols. It transforms observations and historical knowledge into testable hypotheses with
quantitative assessment criteria.

      Systematic Problem Identification —– Reasoning Pipeline Component

      Your task is to analyze the provided information and identify a concise list of Key Challenges
      or Core Problems relevant to achieving success in this competition. Aim for FEWER BUT
      BETTER challenges (e.g., 2-3 critical challenges), focusing on the most impactful aspects.
      Core Analysis Dimensions:
             • Gap Identification: Examine what successful approaches highlight as unexploited
               methodological avenues
             • Domain-Implementation Coherence Check: Identify technical violations of do-
               main constraints



                                                    24
            • SOTA Alignment Analysis: Compare current SOTA against dataset properties and
              identify discrepancies
            • Resource-Performance Trade-offs: Identify computational or time constraint
              issues
      Problem Categorization Framework:
           1. Data-Related Problems: Missing preprocessing, feature engineering gaps, data
              quality issues
           2. Model-Related Problems: Architecture misalignment, hyperparameter suboptimal-
              ity
           3. Evaluation-Related Problems: CV strategy issues, overfitting risks, metric mis-
              alignment
           4. Implementation-Related Problems: Code bugs, inefficient implementations, time-
              out issues

      Scientific Hypothesis Generation —– Reasoning Pipeline Component

      You are a research scientist formulating testable hypotheses. For each hypothesis, perform
      two main tasks: hypothesis proposal and rigorous five-dimensional evaluation.
      Hypothesis Development Guidelines:
           1. Specificity & Decisiveness: State exact, unambiguous changes. Avoid vague goals
               or alternatives.
           2. Testability & Actionability: Describe implementable and measurable changes.
               Focus on single, unified conceptual improvements.
           3. Evidence-Based Reasoning: Ground hypotheses in experimental history or domain
               knowledge.
           4. Implementation Feasibility: Consider resource constraints and technical complex-
               ity.
      Five-Dimensional Evaluation Protocol: Score each hypothesis (1-10) across:
            • Problem-Hypothesis Alignment: How well the hypothesis addresses the identified
               problem
            • Expected Impact: The estimated improvement after applying the hypothesis
            • Novelty: Degree of innovation compared to previous attempts
            • Feasibility: The ease of implementing the proposed hypothesis
            • Risk-Reward Balance: The exploration-exploitation balance of the proposed hy-
               pothesis
      Component Classification: Assign each hypothesis to: DataLoadSpec, FeatureEng,
      Model, Ensemble, or Workflow.

E.4     M EMORY C ONTEXT
The Memory Context component manages collaborative knowledge accumulation and retrieval,
implementing structured feedback analysis and cross-experiment learning mechanisms. It maintains
historical performance records and enables knowledge transfer across exploration traces.

      Structured Experiment Analysis —– Memory Context Component

      You are an advanced assistant analyzing results in data-driven R&D. Your task is to analyze
      the current experiment’s hypothesis, implementation (code and its changes), and results,
      explicitly comparing them with previous best SOTA result step by step.
      Step-by-step Analysis Process:
            1. Verify Submission Format: Check format compliance and validity
            2. Evaluate Alignment with Competition Requirements: Assess consistency with
                evaluation protocol
            3. Analyze Experimental Results: Compare performance with SOTA and validate
                hypothesis
      Key Analysis Components:
             • SOTA Comparison: Direct comparison with historical best performance



                                                  25
          • Code Change Analysis: Analyze implementation differences via diff
          • Performance Evaluation: Score comparison with metric-aware reasoning
          • Hypothesis Validation: Whether experimental results support or refute the hypoth-
            esis
      Memory Integration Guidelines:
         1. Historical Context: Reference previous similar attempts and their outcomes
         2. Pattern Recognition: Identify recurring issues or successful strategies
         3. Knowledge Transfer: Extract reusable insights for future experiments
         4. Risk Assessment: Evaluate potential pitfalls based on historical failures


      Memory-Enhanced Code Generation —– Memory Context Component

      You are a grandmaster-level data scientist generating robust, debuggable code following
      systematic development process.
      Important Context: You are working on sample datasets and your code will go through
      automated iterations. Design your code to be iteration-friendly with comprehensive print
      statements and clear debugging information to facilitate the automatic improvement process.
      Memory-Enhanced Guidelines:
            1. Historical Learning: Reference previous failed attempts and their feedback
            2. Pattern Reuse: Apply successful patterns from similar tasks
            3. Error Prevention: Avoid mistakes that occurred in previous experiments
            4. Performance Optimization: Implement improvements suggested in historical
               feedback
      Quality Assurance Requirements:
             • Debug Mode Integration: Support -debug flag with data sampling and timing
               estimation
             • Structured Output: Use print statements for progress tracking, avoid external
               logging dependencies
             • Reproducibility: Implement proper random seed management and deterministic
               behavior
             • Resource Management: Dynamic resource allocation and proportional data split-
               ting

E.5     C ODING W ORKFLOW
The Coding Workflow component implements an efficient iterative debugging strategy that enables
rapid prototyping through intelligent data sampling and systematic code evaluation. This component
addresses the computational challenge of developing solutions for large-scale datasets by employing
a debug-first approach that mirrors human development practices.

      Iterative Debug Mode Implementation —– Coding Workflow Component

      You are a grandmaster-level data scientist generating robust, debuggable code following
      systematic development process.
      Important Context: You are working on sample datasets and your code will go through
      automated iterations. Design your code to be iteration-friendly with comprehensive print
      statements and clear debugging information to facilitate the automatic improvement process.
      Debug Mode Protocol: Your code will be executed in debug mode with the following
      command:
      python main.py --debug
      Data Sampling Strategy:
            • Training Data: Sample 10% of the training data to quickly test code correctness
            • Epoch Reduction: Run minimum epochs for rapid iteration loops
            • Test Data Efficiency: Perform inference only on the first test sample, use placehold-
              ers for remaining samples
            • Class Preservation: Maintain identical label class numbers between debug and full
              modes



                                                   26
      Timing and Estimation Requirements: Implement precise timing mechanism to estimate
      full run duration:
      start_time = time.time()
      # Train your model (timing scope)
      end_time = time.time()
      debug_time = end_time - start_time
      Output timing information in standardized format:
      === Start of Debug Information ===
      debug_time: {actual_debug_time_in_seconds}
      estimated_time: {estimated_full_run_time_in_seconds}
      === End of Debug Information ===
      Validation Strategy Safeguards: Handle stratified sampling edge cases with robust fallback
      mechanisms:
      try:
             fold_indices = StratifiedKFold(...).split(train_X, train_y)
      except Exception as e:
             fold_indices = KFold(...).split(train_X, train_y)

      Systematic Code Evaluation Framework —– Coding Workflow Component

      Rigorously evaluate code implementation through multi-stage assessment pipeline ensuring
      execution correctness, competition alignment, and submission authenticity.
      Evaluation Pipeline:
           1. Execution Success: Verify error-free code execution with focus on functionality
               over performance
           2. Competition Alignment: Confirm strict adherence to evaluation rules and experi-
               mental setup consistency
           3. Debug Mode Compliance: Validate proper debug mode implementation and timing
               estimation accuracy
           4. Submission Authenticity: Verify genuine model-generated predictions, preventing
               fabricated or placeholder outputs
      Debug Mode Compliance Criteria:
             • Data Sampling: Exactly 10% training data sampling with maintained class distribu-
               tions
             • Timing Accuracy: Reasonable debug execution time with realistic full-run estima-
               tions
             • Early Stopping Integration: Proper consideration of early stopping in time estima-
               tion calculations
             • Output Consistency: Identical submission format between debug and full modes
      Submission Verification Protocol:
             • Format Compliance: Strict matching of column names, index format, and data
               types
             • Authenticity Verification: Cross-reference code logic and stdout to ensure genuine
               model predictions
             • Anti-Cheating Measures: Detect and reject constant, random, or hard-coded
               submission values
             • Model Checkpoint Usage: Verify usage of best saved model for final predictions
      Quality Assurance Standards: The evaluation framework enforces comprehensive quality
      checks including execution traceability, algorithmic appropriateness assessment, and technical
      implementation review to ensure reproducible and reliable solution development.

E.6     E VALUATION S TRATEGY
The Evaluation Strategy component implements automated data splitting and performance assessment
protocols to ensure robust model validation and selection. This component addresses the critical
challenge of overfitting to validation sets by creating consistent holdout datasets and implementing
standardized evaluation protocols across experiments.



                                                   27
   Automated Data Sampling —– Evaluation Strategy Component

   Generate a single, self-contained Python script that strictly follows the user’s instructions.
   Requirements:
          • The script MUST be runnable via python <file>.py without extra arguments
             unless specified
          • Prefer standard libraries; it’s OK to use numpy/pandas/scikit-learn if helpful
          • Use robust error handling and clear messages
          • Use relative paths only and create missing directories when needed
          • Keep the script concise and well-commented
   Data Splitting Protocol: Write a separate script based on this code to sample 90% of the
   data (while maintaining the class proportions as much as possible) as the new train set, and
   10% as the new test set. Save the new train and test in the specified folder.
   Save test label with id to label.csv, which is to be used for grading. Load source data
   from path ./source directory.
   Please make sure the new test set has the same columns as the original test set. Please make
   sure all files used in the original code and exists in source folder are also available in the
   specified folder.


    Standardized Performance Grading — Evaluation Strategy Component

   Write a Python script named grade.py to evaluate submission.csv produced by a
   model. Evaluation Protocol:
           • Input files: label.csv and submission.csv (relative to current working
             directory)
           • Output format: "score": float, "metric": str
           • Metric consistency: Use the same evaluation metric as specified in the reference
             code
           • Error handling: Implement robust parsing and validation of submission format
           • Data splitting strategy: Apply stratified sampling when creating train/validation
             splits to preserve class distribution. When certain classes have insufficient samples
             for proper stratification, prioritize ensuring all classes are represented in the training
             set, then adjust validation split accordingly
   The grading script must extract the competition-specific metric from the reference implemen-
   tation and apply it consistently to the holdout test set, ensuring alignment between validation
   methodology and final evaluation criteria. The evaluation should maintain class balance
   awareness throughout the assessment process.


Validation Selector Implementation: The core evaluation strategy is implemented through the
ValidationSelector class, which performs multi-candidate re-validation using consistent holdout
datasets. This meta-selector operates in four stages:

      1. Candidate Collection: Gathers top-performing experiments from multiple exploration
         branches using BestValidSelector with configurable candidate limits

      2. Synthetic Dataset Generation: Creates stratified 90-10 train-test splits while preserving
         class proportions and data distribution characteristics

      3. Parallel Re-evaluation: Executes all candidate models on the consistent holdout dataset
         using isolated execution environments

      4. Performance Ranking: Applies standardized grading protocols to rank candidates based on
         holdout performance, accounting for metric direction (higher-is-better vs. lower-is-better)

This evaluation framework mitigates validation set overfitting by introducing a consistent, previously
unseen test set for final model selection, while maintaining computational efficiency through parallel
execution and robust error handling across the candidate pool.


                                                   28
F     C ASE S TUDY: C OMPARATIVE A NALYSIS ON J IGSAW T OXIC C OMMENT
      C LASSIFICATION
To provide concrete evidence of R&D-Agent’s capabilities, we present a detailed comparison with
ML-Master on the Jigsaw Toxic Comment Classification Challenge, a multi-label text classification
task with severe class imbalance. Both systems operated under identical conditions: 12-hour runtime,
GPT-5 base model, and single V100 GPU. R&D-Agent achieved a bronze medal while ML-Master
performed slightly above median.
Table 11 summarizes the key technical differences between the two solutions, revealing substantial
distinctions in algorithmic sophistication and implementation quality.

Table 11: Technical comparison of R&D-Agent and ML-Master solutions on Jigsaw Toxic Comment
Classification Challenge

    Aspect              R&D-Agent                                   ML-Master
    Performance         Bronze Medal                                Above Median
    Loss Function       AsymmetricLossMultiLabel (custom)           BCEWithLogitsLoss (standard)
    Batch Strategy      Adaptive (OOM fallback)                     Fixed batch size
    Architecture        Modified RoBERTa w/ dropout                 Unmodified pretrained model
    Text Truncation     Head-tail preservation                      Standard truncation
    Debug Mode          Integrated fast iteration                   Not implemented
    Token Analysis      Per-label statistics                        Basic preprocessing

Our implementation demonstrates higher code quality and algorithmic sophistication. Specifically,
we design a custom AsymmetricLossMultiLabel loss function, which more accurately op-
timizes model performance in multi-label tasks with imbalanced positive and negative samples,
whereas ML-Master employs the standard BCEWithLogitsLoss. Furthermore, we utilize the
attempt_training_with_oom_fallback strategy, which adaptively determines the opti-
mal batch size, thereby improving computational efficiency.
In terms of model architecture, our approach customizes RobertaMultiLabel by incorporating
dropout and adding a flexible, trainable fully connected layer (self.classifier(x)), whereas
ML-Master directly uses the standard AutoModel.from_pretrained(model_name,
config=self.config) without modification. Additionally, we integrate a debug module that
facilitates rapid iteration and significantly reduces development time.
Our code also implements a Head+Tail deterministic truncation strategy, which preserves both the
beginning and end of texts, avoiding information loss, particularly for long sequences. It outputs the
head/tail fraction and truncation ratio, facilitating analysis of truncation effects on model performance.
F.1   C ODE OF R&D-AGENT
R&D-Agent: Core code (Simplified)
# This code is from R&D-agent:

# =========================
# Utility functions
# =========================
def set_global_seed(seed=42):
    random.seed(seed)
    np.random.seed(seed)
    torch.manual_seed(seed)
    torch.cuda.manual_seed_all(seed)
    torch.backends.cudnn.deterministic = True
    torch.backends.cudnn.benchmark = False

def read_csv_safely(path):
    ...
    return df

def sanitize_train_df(train_df, label_cols):




                                                   29
   ...
   return train_df

def sanitize_test_df(test_df):
    ...
    return test_df

# =========================
# Dataset & Collate
# =========================
class TextDataset(Dataset):
    def __init__(self, texts, labels=None):
        self.texts = texts
        self.labels = labels
    def __len__(self):
        return len(self.texts)
    def __getitem__(self, idx):
        if self.labels is not None:
            return self.texts[idx], self.labels[idx]
        return self.texts[idx]

   """
   Collate function implementing deterministic head+tail truncation:
   - Reserve special tokens (tokenizer.num_special_tokens_to_add(pair=False)).
   - If content length > budget, take 75% head and 25% tail.
   - Wrap with special tokens and pad to batch max length (<= max_length).
   """
   special_tokens_count = tokenizer.num_special_tokens_to_add(pair=False)
   content_budget = max_length - special_tokens_count
   head_ratio = 0.75

   def collate(batch):
       if with_labels:
           texts, labels = zip(*batch)
       else:
           texts = batch
           labels = None

       # Minimal normalization
       texts = [str(x).strip() if x is not None else "" for x in texts]

       seqs = []
       masks = []
       for t in texts:
           content_ids = tokenizer.encode(t, add_special_tokens=False)
           if len(content_ids) <= content_budget:
               kept_ids = content_ids
           else:
               head_count = int(math.floor(head_ratio * content_budget))
               tail_count = int(content_budget - head_count)
               if tail_count <= 0:
                   kept_ids = content_ids[:content_budget]
               else:
                   kept_ids = content_ids[:head_count] + content_ids[-tail_count:]
           final_ids = tokenizer.build_inputs_with_special_tokens(kept_ids)
           seqs.append(final_ids)
           masks.append([1] * len(final_ids))

       # Pad to batch max length
       padded = tokenizer.pad(
           {"input_ids": seqs, "attention_mask": masks},
           padding=True,
           return_tensors="pt"
       )

       input_ids = padded["input_ids"]
       attention_mask = padded["attention_mask"]

       if with_labels:
           labels_tensor = torch.tensor(np.array(labels), dtype=torch.float32)
           return input_ids, attention_mask, labels_tensor
       else:
           return input_ids, attention_mask

# =========================
# Model
# =========================
class RobertaMultiLabel(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, model_name, num_labels=6):
        super().__init__()
        self.config = AutoConfig.from_pretrained(model_name)
        self.backbone = AutoModel.from_pretrained(model_name, config=self.config)




                                             30
       hidden_size = getattr(self.config, "hidden_size", 768)
       dropout_prob = getattr(self.config, "classifier_dropout", 0.1)
       self.dropout = nn.Dropout(dropout_prob)
       self.classifier = nn.Linear(hidden_size, num_labels)
   def forward(self, input_ids, attention_mask):
       last_hidden = self.backbone(input_ids, attention_mask).last_hidden_state
       cls_repr = last_hidden[:, 0, :]
       x = self.dropout(cls_repr)
       logits = self.classifier(x)
       return logits

# =========================
# Loss
# =========================
class AsymmetricLossMultiLabel(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, gamma_pos=1.0, gamma_neg=4.0, clip=0.05, eps=1e-8, reduction="mean"):
        super().__init__()
        self.gamma_pos = float(gamma_pos)
        self.gamma_neg = float(gamma_neg)
        self.clip = float(clip) if clip is not None else 0.0
        self.eps = float(eps)
        self.reduction = reduction

   def forward(self, logits: torch.Tensor, targets: torch.Tensor) -> torch.Tensor:
       # logits: [B, C], targets: [B, C] in {0,1}
       # Probabilities
       x_sigmoid = torch.sigmoid(logits)
       xs_pos = x_sigmoid
       xs_neg = 1.0 - x_sigmoid

       # Asymmetric clipping for negatives
       if self.clip > 0:
           xs_neg = torch.clamp(xs_neg + self.clip, max=1.0)

       # Log-likelihoods with numeric stability
       log_pos = torch.log(torch.clamp(xs_pos, min=self.eps))
       log_neg = torch.log(torch.clamp(xs_neg, min=self.eps))

       # Basic loss
       loss = targets * log_pos + (1.0 - targets) * log_neg

       # Asymmetric focusing
       if self.gamma_pos > 0 or self.gamma_neg > 0:
           pt = targets * xs_pos + (1.0 - targets) * xs_neg # pt for each example/label
           one_sided_gamma = self.gamma_pos * targets + self.gamma_neg * (1.0 - targets)
           modulating = torch.pow(1.0 - pt, one_sided_gamma)
           loss = loss * modulating

       # Final reduction
       loss = -loss
       if self.reduction == "mean":
           return loss.mean()
       elif self.reduction == "sum":
           return loss.sum()
       else:
           return loss

# =========================
# Training & Evaluation
# =========================
def evaluate(model, val_loader, device, criterion, use_amp):
    ...
    return mean_auc, per_label_auc, val_loss, probs

def train_one_run(train_loader, val_loader, device, model_name, lr=2e-5, max_epochs=2, ...):
    model = RobertaMultiLabel(model_name).to(device)
    optimizer = torch.optim.AdamW(model.parameters(), lr=lr)
    scheduler = get_linear_schedule_with_warmup(optimizer, ...)
    criterion = AsymmetricLossMultiLabel()
    scaler = torch.cuda.amp.GradScaler(enabled=(device.type=="cuda"))
    best_auc = -float("inf")
    for epoch in range(max_epochs):
        model.train()
        for input_ids, attention_mask, labels in train_loader:
            ...
            scaler.scale(loss).backward()
            scaler.step(optimizer)
            scaler.update()
            scheduler.step()
        mean_auc, _, val_loss, _ = evaluate(model, val_loader, device, criterion,
        use_amp=True)
        if mean_auc > best_auc:




                                             31
              best_auc = mean_auc
              best_state_dict = {k:v.cpu() for k,v in model.state_dict().items()}
      return best_state_dict, best_auc, _

def attempt_training_with_oom_fallback(train_dataset, val_dataset, tokenizer, device,
initial_batch_size=32, max_epochs=2):
    for bs in [initial_batch_size, 24, 16]:
        try:
            train_loader = DataLoader(train_dataset, batch_size=bs, shuffle=True,
            collate_fn=make_head_tail_collate_fn(tokenizer))
            val_loader = DataLoader(val_dataset, batch_size=bs, shuffle=False,
            collate_fn=make_head_tail_collate_fn(tokenizer))
            return train_one_run(train_loader, val_loader, device, model_name="roberta-base",
            max_epochs=max_epochs), bs
        except RuntimeError as e:
            if "out of memory" in str(e).lower():
                torch.cuda.empty_cache()
                continue
            else:
                raise

def main():
...
# Debug mode: sample 10% after split
    if DEBUG:
        rng = np.random.default_rng(seed)
        train_sample_size = max(1, int(0.1 * len(train_idx)))
        val_sample_size = max(1, int(0.1 * len(val_idx)))
        train_idx = rng.choice(train_idx, size=train_sample_size, replace=False)
        val_idx = rng.choice(val_idx, size=val_sample_size, replace=False)
        print(f"DEBUG mode active: using {len(train_idx)} train samples and {len(val_idx)}
        val samples (10% of split).")
...



F.2   C ODE OF ML- MASTER

ML-master: Core code (Simplified)
# This code is from ML master:
import torch
from torch.utils.data import Dataset, DataLoader
from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoModelForSequenceClassification,
get_linear_schedule_with_warmup
from torch.cuda.amp import autocast, GradScaler
import numpy as np

# === Preprocessing & data loading ===
# train_df, test_df = ...
# tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("distilbert-base-uncased")
# encodings = tokenizer(...)

class ToxicDataset(Dataset):
    """Custom dataset for multi-label classification."""
    def __init__(self, encodings, labels=None):
        self.input_ids = encodings["input_ids"]
        self.attention_mask = encodings["attention_mask"]
        self.labels = labels

      def __len__(self): return len(self.input_ids)
      def __getitem__(self, idx):
          item = {
              "input_ids": torch.tensor(self.input_ids[idx]),
              "attention_mask": torch.tensor(self.attention_mask[idx]),
          }
          if self.labels is not None:
              item["labels"] = torch.tensor(self.labels[idx])
          return item

# === DataLoader setup ===
train_loader = DataLoader(ToxicDataset(...), batch_size=32, shuffle=True)
val_loader   = DataLoader(ToxicDataset(...), batch_size=32)

# === Model, optimizer, and scheduler ===
device = torch.device("cuda" if torch.cuda.is_available() else "cpu")
model = AutoModelForSequenceClassification.from_pretrained(
    "distilbert-base-uncased", num_labels=6
).to(device)

optimizer = torch.optim.AdamW(model.parameters(), lr=2e-5)




                                               32
scheduler = get_linear_schedule_with_warmup(optimizer, num_warmup_steps=...,
num_training_steps=...)
criterion = torch.nn.BCEWithLogitsLoss(pos_weight=...)
scaler = GradScaler()

# === Evaluation function ===
def evaluate(model, loader):
    """Compute ROC-AUC on validation set."""
    model.eval()
    all_probs, all_true = [], []
    with torch.no_grad():
        for batch in loader:
            input_ids = batch["input_ids"].to(device)
            mask = batch["attention_mask"].to(device)
            outputs = model(input_ids=input_ids, attention_mask=mask)
            probs = torch.sigmoid(outputs.logits).cpu().numpy()
            all_probs.append(probs)
            if "labels" in batch: all_true.append(batch["labels"].cpu().numpy())
    # Compute mean AUC over all labels
    ...
    return mean_auc

# === Training loop ===
best_auc, best_state = -np.inf, None
for epoch in range(2):
    model.train()
    for batch in train_loader:
        input_ids = batch["input_ids"].to(device)
        mask = batch["attention_mask"].to(device)
        labels = batch["labels"].to(device)

       optimizer.zero_grad(set_to_none=True)
       with autocast():
           outputs = model(input_ids=input_ids, attention_mask=mask)
           loss = criterion(outputs.logits, labels)

       scaler.scale(loss).backward()
       scaler.step(optimizer)
       scaler.update()
       scheduler.step()

   # Validation step
   val_auc = evaluate(model, val_loader)
   if val_auc > best_auc:
       best_auc, best_state = val_auc, {k: v.cpu().clone() for k, v in
       model.state_dict().items()}

# === Final evaluation & prediction ===
model.load_state_dict(best_state)
final_auc = evaluate(model, val_loader)
# test_preds = model(...)
# sub.to_csv("submission.csv")




                                             33
